Dominoes. Quick starter. Sherlock Holmes. The Dying Detective.
By Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. Adapted by Leslie Thompson.
Read by Deneka Fairman. Rob Fitch. Wayne Forrester. Roger May. And James Daniel Wilson.
Published in Copyright Oxford University Press 2016.
Chapter 1. Holmes is ill.
It is 1890 in London. At 221B Baker Street. Mrs Hudson. Sherlock Holmes's servant is sad.
Things are very bad. Holmes is dying. Three days now. And he is worse. She thinks.
Mrs Hudson likes Holmes very much. But she is also a little afraid of him.
He is different. He has strange visitors. And they come at all hours of the day and night.
His rooms have many strange things in them. But he is very nice to Mrs Hudson.
She respects him. And she does not want to lose him.
I must visit Dr Watson. She thinks. He can help.
At this time Dr Watson is living in a different street in London.
Mrs Hudson goes quickly to his rooms.
Dr Watson. She cries. When the doctor opens the door to her.
Please come with me. It is Mr Holmes. He is dying.
What? Watson cries. I know nothing about this.
He doesn't want a doctor. But you must come sir. After three days he is very very ill.
He is saying strange things. I am afraid for him. You must be quick.
Watson gets his coat and bag. And they leave the house.
In the cab he asks Mrs Hudson some more questions.
I can't tell you much sir.
Lately Mr Holmes is working in Rotherhive near the river.
He comes home and he brings this illness with him.
He is much worse now. Can he live through this?
Chapter Two. Watson cannot help.
When they arrive at Baker Street on that dark November day Holmes is alive.
But Watson is afraid for his friend. The detective's face is yellow
and his eyes are red with fever. His hands move without stopping.
When he speaks his voice is weak.
Well Watson bad days are here I think. He smiles weekly.
My poor man cries Watson and he moves towards the bed.
Don't come near me. But why? I only want to help.
I know but you can't help me. My illness is from the far east and it's very contagious.
I'm a doctor says Watson quietly. These things don't matter to me.
Don't move and I can talk to you. If not you must leave the room now.
Holmes looks at Watson with fever in his eyes.
I can't trust you with this Watson. You know nothing of these strange illnesses.
Do you know about tapa newly fever for example or the black formosa fever?
No you don't. You aren't a specialist.
I'm sorry to say this but I must see a specialist.
Watson is not happy at these words but he also respects the detective.
Very well Holmes. Dr Ainstree the best specialist in these illnesses is now in London.
I'm going to him now.
Watson walks towards the door. Suddenly Holmes is out of bed.
He goes quickly to the door and locks it. Then he goes very slowly back to bed.
What's and looks at his friend in shock. What is the matter with Holmes?
Chapter three. Holmes is worse.
Holmes cries excitedly.
Stay here Watson. I've got the key. What time is it?
Four o'clock. At six o'clock you can go but not before.
What's and looks at his friend sadly. Holmes. This illness is doing strange things to your head.
But I can wait until six. Good. One more thing Watson. Don't bring that man Ainstree.
Now perhaps I can sleep a little. Watson waits looking at the pictures and books in the room.
On a table he sees a little black and white box. Hmm that's interesting. He thinks.
He moves his hand towards it. Suddenly a terrible cry comes from the bed.
Stop Watson. Don't move my things. I don't like it. Sit down man. I need to sleep.
At six o'clock Holmes says. Let's have some light Watson. But only a little. Put the box near me.
And not with your hands. Use your handkerchief. That's right.
Now you can go to Mr. Culverton Smith of Thirteen Lower Burke Street. But who is this man Holmes?
I don't know the name. He isn't a doctor. He has a plantation in Sumatra but he's visiting London.
He knows this illness well because his workers often have it. Things are not good between us.
Smith's nephew Victor Savage is dead. There is something wrong about his terrible death.
I don't trust Smith and he knows it. But only he can help me. There is one more thing.
Don't come back with him. You must be here before him. This is very important Watson.
Watson takes the key and he goes into the street. He sees Inspector Morton of Scotland Yard.
How is Mr. Holmes, sir? Morton asks. He's very ill. Watson answers. Morton smiles strangely.
I know something about it. He says. Watson doesn't understand. But he cannot wait. He gets into a cab and leaves.
Chapter Four. The Specialist.
At Thirteen Lower Burke Street, a servant answers the door. Watson goes into the house.
He can hear Culverton Smith's voice. Oh, Ace, Watson. What does he want? I need to work. I cannot see him.
Watson thinks of Holmes. Quickly, he goes into the room.
The man in the room stands up from his chair. Watson sees his dark, angry eyes. What's this?
The man cries. I'm sorry, says Watson. But I can't wait. It's about Mr. Sherlock Holmes.
Colverton Smith's face changes. He watches Watson carefully. What about Holmes? How is he? He's very ill.
Watson sits down. Is that a smile on Smith's face? I'm sorry to hear this. Smith says. I don't know Holmes well, but I respect him. We're not very different.
He studies criminals, and I study microbes. He looks at the bottles on the table next to him and laughs.
Holmes needs you. Watson says. Why? Is his illness from the Far East?
Perhaps his work lately is with people from there. Oh, I see. Smith smiles. How many days is it now?
About three? Is he thinking well? Not always. That is bad. I must go and help him.
Watson remembers Holmes' words. He says, I can't go with you. I need to make a visit. Very well.
Smith says, I can be there in half an hour.
Chapter five. A killer at Baker Street.
Watson runs into Holmes' room. Is he coming? Holmes asks. Yes, he is. Very good, Watson.
Hmm. Now you must hide behind the bed. Don't speak or move. Just listen very carefully.
Watson hides behind the bed and waits. Soon he hears Colvat and Smith's voice.
Can you hear me, Holmes? Is that you, Mr. Smith? Holmes says weekly. Thank you for coming. Smith laughs.
What's the matter with you, Holmes? It's Victor's illness, I think. Yes. My nephew. Four days ill and he's dead.
Smith laughs again. And you are the criminal, Smith. But you can't prove it. And now you need me.
Give me water. Holmes says weekly. All right. But only because I want to say something to you.
Your illness is from men working near the river, your friend says. But that's wrong. You aren't
very quick. Are you Holmes? I can't think. You must help me. Think carefully. Think about a box
arriving here last Wednesday. A box. Yes. I remember now. The spring in the box
on my hand. The blood. That's right. And there are microbes of your illness on that spring.
This box is the only proof. And I'm taking it with me. Now you know the truth. Now you can.
Die. More light says Holmes weekly. Smith moves. And suddenly there is more light in the room.
What more can I do for you? Smith asks. And more water, please.
Holmes says. But what is happening? Holmes is speaking normally. His voice is not weak.
Watson hears this. And he nearly cries out. He can feel Culverton Smith's shock.
Chapter six. The truth.
What is this? Aren't you ill? Culverton Smith asks angrily. After three days without food or drink,
I'm not very well. But I'm much better than you think. Holmes says in his normal voice.
Ah. A friend is coming, I think. The light is telling him to come.
The door opens. And Inspector Morton comes in. This is your man, Inspector. Holmes says.
I arrest you for the murder of Victor Savage. Morton says to Smith. He wants my murder too.
Holmes laughs. The proof is in the box in his coat. But don't put your hand on it, Inspector.
Smith cries. You can't prove anything, Holmes.
Don't forget my friend, Dr. Watson. Holmes says. He can tell an interesting story. Come out, Watson.
Hmm. Morton leaves with Culverton Smith. Holmes dresses, and then he talks to Watson.
I'm a good actor, Watson. And no food or drink for three days is easy for me. This yellow face
is only makeup. You can't come near me and not see the truth. So my illness is contagious.
Bad light in the room helps with my act. Victor Savage's murder is all about money.
Money is more important than family to Culverton Smith. I get some strange things at this house.
Happily, I always open them very carefully. Now we must go to Scotland Yard. After that,
I want to sit down with you and eat until midnight.